If my poor Flatland friend retained the vigour of mind which he enjoyed
when he began to compose these Memoirs, I should not now need to
represent him in this preface, in which he desires, firstly, to return
his thanks to his readers and critics in Spaceland, whose appreciation
has, with unexpected celerity, required a second edition of his work;
secondly, to apologize for certain errors and misprints (for which,
however, he is not entirely responsible); and, thirdly, to explain one
or two misconceptions.  But he is not the Square he once was.  Years of
imprisonment, and the still heavier burden of general incredulity and
mockery, have combined with the natural decay of old age to erase from
his mind many of the thoughts and notions, and much also of the
terminology, which he acquired during his short stay in Spaceland.  He
has, therefore, requested me to reply in his behalf to two special
objections, one of an intellectual, the other of a moral nature.

The first objection is, that a Flatlander, seeing a Line, sees
something that must be THICK to the eye as well as LONG to the eye
(otherwise it would not be visible, if it had not some thickness); and
consequently he ought (it is argued) to acknowledge that his countrymen
are not only long and broad, but also (though doubtless in a very
slight degree) THICK or HIGH.  This objection is plausible, and, to
Spacelanders, almost irresistible, so that, I confess, when I first
heard it, I knew not what to reply.  But my poor old friend's answer
appears to me completely to meet it.

"I admit," said he--when I mentioned to him this objection--"I admit
the truth of your critic's facts, but I deny his conclusions.  It is
true that we have really in Flatland a Third unrecognized Dimension
called 'height', just as it is also true that you have really in
Spaceland a Fourth unrecognized Dimension, called by no name at
present, but which I will call 'extra-height'.  But we can no more take
cognizance of our 'height' than you can of your 'extra-height'.  Even
I--who have been in Spaceland, and have had the privilege of
understanding for twenty-four hours the meaning of 'height'--even I
cannot now comprehend it, nor realize it by the sense of sight or by
any process of reason; I can but apprehend it by faith.

"The reason is obvious.  Dimension implies direction, implies
measurement, implies the more and the less.  Now, all our lines are
EQUALLY and INFINITESIMALLY thick (or high, whichever you like);
consequently, there is nothing in them to lead our minds to the
conception of that Dimension.  No 'delicate micrometer'--as has been
suggested by one too hasty Spaceland critic--would in the least avail
us; for we should not know WHAT TO MEASURE, NOR IN WHAT DIRECTION.
When we see a Line, we see something that is long and BRIGHT;
BRIGHTNESS, as well as length, is necessary to the existence of a Line;
if the brightness vanishes, the Line is extinguished.  Hence, all my
Flatland friends--when I talk to them about the unrecognized Dimension
which is somehow visible in a Line--say, 'Ah, you mean BRIGHTNESS':
and when I reply, 'No, I mean a real Dimension', they at once retort,
'Then measure it, or tell us in what direction it extends'; and this
silences me, for I can do neither.  Only yesterday, when the Chief
Circle (in other words our High Priest) came to inspect the State
Prison and paid me his seventh annual visit, and when for the seventh
time he put me the question, 'Was I any better?' I tried to prove to
him that he was 'high', as well as long and broad, although he did not
know it.  But what was his reply?  'You say I am "high"; measure my
"high-ness" and I will believe you.'  What could I do?  How could I
meet his challenge?  I was crushed; and he left the room triumphant.

"Does this still seem strange to you?  Then put yourself in a similar
position.  Suppose a person of the Fourth Dimension, condescending to
visit you, were to say, 'Whenever you open your eyes, you see a Plane
(which is of Two Dimensions) and you INFER a Solid (which is of Three);
but in reality you also see (though you do not recognize) a Fourth
Dimension, which is not colour nor brightness nor anything of the kind,
but a true Dimension, although I cannot point out to you its direction,
nor can you possibly measure it.'  What would you say to such a
visitor?  Would not you have him locked up?  Well, that is my fate: and
it is as natural for us Flatlanders to lock up a Square for preaching
the Third Dimension, as it is for you Spacelanders to lock up a Cube
for preaching the Fourth.  Alas, how strong a family likeness runs
through blind and persecuting humanity in all Dimensions!  Points,
Lines, Squares, Cubes, Extra-Cubes--we are all liable to the same
errors, all alike the Slaves of our respective Dimensional prejudices,
as one of your Spaceland poets has said--

     'One touch of Nature makes all worlds akin'."

[Note:  The Author desires me to add, that the misconception of some of
his critics on this matter has induced him to insert in his dialogue
with the Sphere, certain remarks which have a bearing on the point in
question, and which he had previously omitted as being tedious and
unnecessary.]

On this point the defence of the Square seems to me to be impregnable.
I wish I could say that his answer to the second (or moral) objection
was equally clear and cogent.  It has been objected that he is a
woman-hater; and as this objection has been vehemently urged by those
whom Nature's decree has constituted the somewhat larger half of the
Spaceland race, I should like to remove it, so far as I can honestly do
so.  But the Square is so unaccustomed to the use of the moral
terminology of Spaceland that I should be doing him an injustice if I
were literally to transcribe his defence against this charge.  Acting,
therefore, as his interpreter and summarizer, I gather that in the
course of an imprisonment of seven years he has himself modified his
own personal views, both as regards Women and as regards the Isosceles
or Lower Classes.  Personally, he now inclines to the opinion of the
Sphere that the Straight Lines are in many important respects superior
to the Circles.  But, writing as a Historian, he has identified himself
(perhaps too closely) with the views generally adopted by Flatland, and
(as he has been informed) even by Spaceland, Historians; in whose pages
(until very recent times) the destinies of Women and of the masses of
mankind have seldom been deemed worthy of mention and never of careful
consideration.

In a still more obscure passage he now desires to disavow the Circular
or aristocratic tendencies with which some critics have naturally
credited him.  While doing justice to the intellectual power with which
a few Circles have for many generations maintained their supremacy over
immense multitudes of their countrymen, he believes that the facts of
Flatland, speaking for themselves without comment on his part, declare
that Revolutions cannot always be suppressed by slaughter, and that
Nature, in sentencing the Circles to infecundity, has condemned them to
ultimate failure--"and herein," he says, "I see a fulfilment of the
great Law of all worlds, that while the wisdom of Man thinks it is
working one thing, the wisdom of Nature constrains it to work another,
and quite a different and far better thing."  For the rest, he begs his
readers not to suppose that every minute detail in the daily life of
Flatland must needs correspond to some other detail in Spaceland; and
yet he hopes that, taken as a whole, his work may prove suggestive as
well as amusing, to those Spacelanders of moderate and modest minds
who--speaking of that which is of the highest importance, but lies
beyond experience--decline to say on the one hand, "This can never be,"
and on the other hand, "It must needs be precisely thus, and we know
all about it."






CONTENTS:



PART I:  THIS WORLD

Section

   1.  Of the Nature of Flatland
   2.  Of the Climate and Houses in Flatland
   3.  Concerning the Inhabitants of Flatland
   4.  Concerning the Women
   5.  Of our Methods of Recognizing one another
   6.  Of Recognition by Sight
   7.  Concerning Irregular Figures
   8.  Of the Ancient Practice of Painting
   9.  Of the Universal Colour Bill
  10.  Of the Suppression of the Chromatic Sedition
  11.  Concerning our Priests
  12.  Of the Doctrine of our Priests

PART II:  OTHER WORLDS

  13.  How I had a Vision of Lineland
  14.  How I vainly tried to explain the nature of Flatland
  15.  Concerning a Stranger from Spaceland
  16.  How the Stranger vainly endeavoured to reveal to me
         in words the mysteries of Spaceland
  17.  How the Sphere, having in vain tried words,
         resorted to deeds
  18.  How I came to Spaceland, and what I saw there
  19.  How, though the Sphere shewed me other mysteries
         of Spaceland, I still desired more; and what came of it
  20.  How the Sphere encouraged me in a Vision
  21.  How I tried to teach the Theory of Three Dimensions
         to my Grandson, and with what success
  22.  How I then tried to diffuse the Theory
         of Three Dimensions by other means, and of the result






PART I:  THIS WORLD

"Be patient, for the world is broad and wide."






Section 1.  Of the Nature of Flatland



I call our world Flatland, not because we call it so, but to make its
nature clearer to you, my happy readers, who are privileged to live in
Space.

Imagine a vast sheet of paper on which straight Lines, Triangles,
Squares, Pentagons, Hexagons, and other figures, instead of remaining
fixed in their places, move freely about, on or in the surface, but
without the power of rising above or sinking below it, very much like
shadows--only hard and with luminous edges--and you will then have a
pretty correct notion of my country and countrymen.  Alas, a few years
ago, I should have said "my universe":  but now my mind has been opened
to higher views of things.

In such a country, you will perceive at once that it is impossible that
there should be anything of what you call a "solid" kind; but I dare
say you will suppose that we could at least distinguish by sight the
Triangles, Squares, and other figures, moving about as I have described
them.  On the contrary, we could see nothing of the kind, not at least
so as to distinguish one figure from another.  Nothing was visible, nor
could be visible, to us, except Straight Lines; and the necessity of
this I will speedily demonstrate.

Place a penny on the middle of one of your tables in Space; and leaning
over it, look down upon it.  It will appear a circle.

But now, drawing back to the edge of the table, gradually lower your
eye (thus bringing yourself more and more into the condition of the
inhabitants of Flatland), and you will find the penny becoming more and
more oval to your view, and at last when you have placed your eye
exactly on the edge of the table (so that you are, as it were, actually
a Flatlander) the penny will then have ceased to appear oval at all,
and will have become, so far as you can see, a straight line.

The same thing would happen if you were to treat in the same way a
Triangle, or Square, or any other figure cut out of pasteboard.  As
soon as you look at it with your eye on the edge on the table, you will
find that it ceases to appear to you a figure, and that it becomes in
appearance a straight line.  Take for example an equilateral
Triangle--who represents with us a Tradesman of the respectable class.
Fig. 1 represents the Tradesman as you would see him while you were
bending over him from above; figs. 2 and 3 represent the Tradesman, as
you would see him if your eye were close to the level, or all but on
the level of the table; and if your eye were quite on the level of the
table (and that is how we see him in Flatland) you would see nothing
but a straight line.


[Illustration 1]

[ASCII approximation follows]


  (1)     __________     (2)    ___________     (3)     _________
          \        /             --__ __--                 ---
            \    /                   -
              \/


When I was in Spaceland I heard that your sailors have very similar
experiences while they traverse your seas and discern some distant
island or coast lying on the horizon.  The far-off land may have bays,
forelands, angles in and out to any number and extent; yet at a
distance you see none of these (unless indeed your sun shines bright
upon them revealing the projections and retirements by means of light
and shade), nothing but a grey unbroken line upon the water.

Well, that is just what we see when one of our triangular or other
acquaintances comes toward us in Flatland.  As there is neither sun
with us, nor any light of such a kind as to make shadows, we have none
of the helps to the sight that you have in Spaceland.  If our friend
comes closer to us we see his line becomes larger; if he leaves us it
becomes smaller:  but still he looks like a straight line; be he a
Triangle, Square, Pentagon, Hexagon, Circle, what you will--a straight
Line he looks and nothing else.

You may perhaps ask how under these disadvantageous circumstances we
are able to distinguish our friends from one another: but the answer to
this very natural question will be more fitly and easily given when I
come to describe the inhabitants of Flatland.  For the present let me
defer this subject, and say a word or two about the climate and houses
in our country.




Section 2.  Of the Climate and Houses in Flatland



As with you, so also with us, there are four points of the compass
North, South, East, and West.

There being no sun nor other heavenly bodies, it is impossible for us
to determine the North in the usual way; but we have a method of our
own.  By a Law of Nature with us, there is a constant attraction to the
South; and, although in temperate climates this is very slight--so that
even a Woman in reasonable health can journey several furlongs
northward without much difficulty--yet the hampering effect of the
southward attraction is quite sufficient to serve as a compass in most
parts of our earth.  Moreover, the rain (which falls at stated
intervals) coming always from the North, is an additional assistance;
and in the towns we have the guidance of the houses, which of course
have their side-walls running for the most part North and South, so
that the roofs may keep off the rain from the North.  In the country,
where there are no houses, the trunks of the trees serve as some sort
of guide.  Altogether, we have not so much difficulty as might be
expected in determining our bearings.

Yet in our more temperate regions, in which the southward attraction is
hardly felt, walking sometimes in a perfectly desolate plain where
there have been no houses nor trees to guide me, I have been
occasionally compelled to remain stationary for hours together, waiting
till the rain came before continuing my journey.  On the weak and aged,
and especially on delicate Females, the force of attraction tells much
more heavily than on the robust of the Male Sex, so that it is a point
of breeding, if you meet a Lady in the street, always to give her the
North side of the way--by no means an easy thing to do always at short
notice when you are in rude health and in a climate where it is
difficult to tell your North from your South.

Windows there are none in our houses:  for the light comes to us alike
in our homes and out of them, by day and by night, equally at all times
and in all places, whence we know not.  It was in old days, with our
learned men, an interesting and oft-investigated question, "What is the
origin of light?" and the solution of it has been repeatedly attempted,
with no other result than to crowd our lunatic asylums with the
would-be solvers.  Hence, after fruitless attempts to suppress such
investigations indirectly by making them liable to a heavy tax, the
Legislature, in comparatively recent times, absolutely prohibited them.
I--alas, I alone in Flatland--know now only too well the true solution
of this mysterious problem; but my knowledge cannot be made
intelligible to a single one of my countrymen; and I am mocked at--I,
the sole possessor of the truths of Space and of the theory of the
introduction of Light from the world of three Dimensions--as if I were
the maddest of the mad!  But a truce to these painful digressions:  let
me return to our houses.

The most common form for the construction of a house is five-sided or
pentagonal, as in the annexed figure.  The two Northern sides RO, OF,
constitute the roof, and for the most part have no doors; on the East
is a small door for the Women; on the West a much larger one for the
Men; the South side or floor is usually doorless.

Square and triangular houses are not allowed, and for this reason.  The
angles of a Square (and still more those of an equilateral Triangle),
being much more pointed than those of a Pentagon, and the lines of
inanimate objects (such as houses) being dimmer than the lines of Men
and Women, it follows that there is no little danger lest the points of
a square or triangular house residence might do serious injury to an
inconsiderate or perhaps absent-minded traveller suddenly therefore,
running against them:  and as early as the eleventh century of our era,
triangular houses were universally forbidden by Law, the only
exceptions being fortifications, powder-magazines, barracks, and other
state buildings, which it is not desirable that the general public
should approach without circumspection.


[Illustration 2]

[ASCII approximation follows]


                             O
                             /\
                           /    \
                         /        \
                       /            \
                     /                \
                  R/                    \F
                   \_                   /
                                      _/
          Men's door                 _   Women's door
                       _             /
                       \____________/
                       A            B


At this period, square houses were still everywhere permitted, though
discouraged by a special tax.  But, about three centuries afterwards,
the Law decided that in all towns containing a population above ten
thousand, the angle of a Pentagon was the smallest house-angle that
could be allowed consistently with the public safety.  The good sense
of the community has seconded the efforts of the Legislature; and now,
even in the country, the pentagonal construction has superseded every
other.  It is only now and then in some very remote and backward
agricultural district that an antiquarian may still discover a square
house.




Section 3.  Concerning the Inhabitants of Flatland



The greatest length or breadth of a full grown inhabitant of Flatland
may be estimated at about eleven of your inches.  Twelve inches may be
regarded as a maximum.

Our Women are Straight Lines.

Our Soldiers and Lowest Classes of Workmen are Triangles with two equal
sides, each about eleven inches long, and a base or third side so short
(often not exceeding half an inch) that they form at their vertices a
very sharp and formidable angle.  Indeed when their bases are of the
most degraded type (not more than the eighth part of an inch in size),
they can hardly be distinguished from Straight Lines or Women; so
extremely pointed are their vertices.  With us, as with you, these
Triangles are distinguished from others by being called Isosceles; and
by this name I shall refer to them in the following pages.

Our Middle Class consists of Equilateral or Equal-Sided Triangles.

Our Professional Men and Gentlemen are Squares (to which class I myself
belong) and Five-Sided Figures or Pentagons.

Next above these come the Nobility, of whom there are several degrees,
beginning at Six-Sided Figures, or Hexagons, and from thence rising in
the number of their sides till they receive the honourable title of
Polygonal, or many-sided.  Finally when the number of the sides becomes
so numerous, and the sides themselves so small, that the figure cannot
be distinguished from a circle, he is included in the Circular or
Priestly order; and this is the highest class of all.

It is a Law of Nature with us that a male child shall have one more
side than his father, so that each generation shall rise (as a rule)
one step in the scale of development and nobility.  Thus the son of a
Square is a Pentagon; the son of a Pentagon, a Hexagon; and so on.

But this rule applies not always to the Tradesmen, and still less often
to the Soldiers, and to the Workmen; who indeed can hardly be said to
deserve the name of human Figures, since they have not all their sides
equal.  With them therefore the Law of Nature does not hold; and the
son of an Isosceles (i.e. a Triangle with two sides equal) remains
Isosceles still.  Nevertheless, all hope is not shut out, even from the
Isosceles, that his posterity may ultimately rise above his degraded
condition.  For, after a long series of military successes, or diligent
and skilful labours, it is generally found that the more intelligent
among the Artisan and Soldier classes manifest a slight increase of
their third side or base, and a shrinkage of the two other sides.
Intermarriages (arranged by the Priests) between the sons and daughters
of these more intellectual members of the lower classes generally
result in an offspring approximating still more to the type of the
Equal-Sided Triangle.

Rarely--in proportion to the vast numbers of Isosceles births--is a
genuine and certifiable Equal-Sided Triangle produced from Isosceles
parents.  [Note:  "What need of a certificate?" a Spaceland critic may
ask:  "Is not the procreation of a Square Son a certificate from Nature
herself, proving the Equal-sidedness of the Father?"  I reply that no
Lady of any position will marry an uncertified Triangle.  Square
offspring has sometimes resulted from a slightly Irregular Triangle;
but in almost every such case the Irregularity of the first generation
is visited on the third; which either fails to attain the Pentagonal
rank, or relapses to the Triangular.]  Such a birth requires, as its
antecedents, not only a series of carefully arranged intermarriages,
but also a long, continued exercise of frugality and self-control on
the part of the would-be ancestors of the coming Equilateral, and a
patient, systematic, and continuous development of the Isosceles
intellect through many generations.

The birth of a True Equilateral Triangle from Isosceles parents is the
subject of rejoicing in our country for many furlongs around.  After a
strict examination conducted by the Sanitary and Social Board, the
infant, if certified as Regular, is with solemn ceremonial admitted
into the class of Equilaterals.  He is then immediately taken from his
proud yet sorrowing parents and adopted by some childless Equilateral,
who is bound by oath never to permit the child henceforth to enter his
former home or so much as to look upon his relations again, for fear
lest the freshly developed organism may, by force of unconscious
imitation, fall back again into his hereditary level.

The occasional emergence of an Equilateral from the ranks of his
serf-born ancestors is welcomed, not only by the poor serfs themselves,
as a gleam of light and hope shed upon the monotonous squalor of their
existence, but also by the Aristocracy at large; for all the higher
classes are well aware that these rare phenomena, while they do little
or nothing to vulgarize their own privileges, serve as a most useful
barrier against revolution from below.

Had the acute-angled rabble been all, without exception, absolutely
destitute of hope and of ambition, they might have found leaders in
some of their many seditious outbreaks, so able as to render their
superior numbers and strength too much even for the wisdom of the
Circles.  But a wise ordinance of Nature has decreed that, in
proportion as the working-classes increase in intelligence, knowledge,
and all virtue, in that same proportion their acute angle (which makes
them physically terrible) shall increase also and approximate to the
comparatively harmless angle of the Equilateral Triangle.  Thus, in the
most brutal and formidable of the soldier class--creatures almost on a
level with women in their lack of intelligence--it is found that, as
they wax in the mental ability necessary to employ their tremendous
penetrating power to advantage, so do they wane in the power of
penetration itself.

How admirable is this Law of Compensation!  And how perfect a proof of
the natural fitness and, I may almost say, the divine origin of the
aristocratic constitution of the States in Flatland!  By a judicious
use of this Law of Nature, the Polygons and Circles are almost always
able to stifle sedition in its very cradle, taking advantage of the
irrepressible and boundless hopefulness of the human mind.  Art also
comes to the aid of Law and Order.  It is generally found possible--by
a little artificial compression or expansion on the part of the State
physicians--to make some of the more intelligent leaders of a rebellion
perfectly Regular, and to admit them at once into the privileged
classes; a much larger number, who are still below the standard,
allured by the prospect of being ultimately ennobled, are induced to
enter the State Hospitals, where they are kept in honourable
confinement for life; one or two alone of the more obstinate, foolish,
and hopelessly irregular are led to execution.

Then the wretched rabble of the Isosceles, planless and leaderless, are
either transfixed without resistance by the small body of their
brethren whom the Chief Circle keeps in pay for emergencies of this
kind; or else more often, by means of jealousies and suspicions
skilfully fomented among them by the Circular party, they are stirred
to mutual warfare, and perish by one another's angles.  No less than
one hundred and twenty rebellions are recorded in our annals, besides
minor outbreaks numbered at two hundred and thirty-five; and they have
all ended thus.




Section 4.  Concerning the Women



If our highly pointed Triangles of the Soldier class are formidable, it
may be readily inferred that far more formidable are our Women.  For if
a Soldier is a wedge, a Woman is a needle; being, so to speak, ALL
point, at least at the two extremities.  Add to this the power of
making herself practically invisible at will, and you will perceive
that a Female, in Flatland, is a creature by no means to be trifled
with.

But here, perhaps, some of my younger Readers may ask HOW a woman in
Flatland can make herself invisible.  This ought, I think, to be
apparent without any explanation.  However, a few words will make it
clear to the most unreflecting.

Place a needle on a table.  Then, with your eye on the level of the
table, look at it side-ways, and you see the whole length of it; but
look at it end-ways, and you see nothing but a point, it has become
practically invisible.  Just so is it with one of our Women.  When her
side is turned towards us, we see her as a straight line; when the end
containing her eye or mouth--for with us these two organs are
identical--is the part that meets our eye, then we see nothing but a
highly lustrous point; but when the back is presented to our view,
then--being only sub-lustrous, and, indeed, almost as dim as an
inanimate object--her hinder extremity serves her as a kind of
Invisible Cap.

The dangers to which we are exposed from our Women must now be manifest
to the meanest capacity in Spaceland.  If even the angle of a
respectable Triangle in the middle class is not without its dangers; if
to run against a Working Man involves a gash; if collision with an
officer of the military class necessitates a serious wound; if a mere
touch from the vertex of a Private Soldier brings with it danger of
death;--what can it be to run against a Woman, except absolute and
immediate destruction?  And when a Woman is invisible, or visible only
as a dim sub-lustrous point, how difficult must it be, even for the
most cautious, always to avoid collision!

Many are the enactments made at different times in the different States
of Flatland, in order to minimize this peril; and in the Southern and
less temperate climates where the force of gravitation is greater, and
human beings more liable to casual and involuntary motions, the Laws
concerning Women are naturally much more stringent.  But a general view
of the Code may be obtained from the following summary:--


1.  Every house shall have one entrance in the Eastern side, for the
use of Females only; by which all females shall enter "in a becoming
and respectful manner" and not by the Men's or Western door.  [Note:
When I was in Spaceland I understood that some of your Priestly circles
have in the same way a separate entrance for Villagers, Farmers and
Teachers of Board Schools (`Spectator', Sept. 1884, p. 1255) that they
may "approach in a becoming and respectful manner."]

2.  No Female shall walk in any public place without continually
keeping up her Peace-cry, under penalty of death.

3.  Any Female, duly certified to be suffering from St. Vitus's Dance,
fits, chronic cold accompanied by violent sneezing, or any disease
necessitating involuntary motions, shall be instantly destroyed.


In some of the States there is an additional Law forbidding Females,
under penalty of death, from walking or standing in any public place
without moving their backs constantly from right to left so as to
indicate their presence to those behind them; others oblige a Woman,
when travelling, to be followed by one of her sons, or servants, or by
her husband; others confine Women altogether to their houses except
during the religious festivals.  But it has been found by the wisest of
our Circles or Statesmen that the multiplication of restrictions on
Females tends not only to the debilitation and diminution of the race,
but also to the increase of domestic murders to such an extent that a
State loses more than it gains by a too prohibitive Code.

For whenever the temper of the Women is thus exasperated by confinement
at home or hampering regulations abroad, they are apt to vent their
spleen upon their husbands and children; and in the less temperate
climates the whole male population of a village has been sometimes
destroyed in one or two hours of simultaneous female outbreak.  Hence
the Three Laws, mentioned above, suffice for the better regulated
States, and may be accepted as a rough exemplification of our Female
Code.

After all, our principal safeguard is found, not in Legislature, but in
the interests of the Women themselves.  For, although they can inflict
instantaneous death by a retrograde movement, yet unless they can at
once disengage their stinging extremity from the struggling body of
their victim, their own frail bodies are liable to be shattered.

The power of Fashion is also on our side.  I pointed out that in some
less civilized States no female is suffered to stand in any public
place without swaying her back from right to left.  This practice has
been universal among ladies of any pretensions to breeding in all
well-governed States, as far back as the memory of Figures can reach.
It is considered a disgrace to any State that legislation should have
to enforce what ought to be, and is in every respectable female, a
natural instinct.  The rhythmical and, if I may so say, well-modulated
undulation of the back in our ladies of Circular rank is envied and
imitated by the wife of a common Equilateral, who can achieve nothing
beyond a mere monotonous swing, like the ticking of a pendulum; and the
regular tick of the Equilateral is no less admired and copied by the
wife of the progressive and aspiring Isosceles, in the females of whose
family no "back-motion" of any kind has become as yet a necessity of
life.  Hence, in every family of position and consideration, "back
motion" is as prevalent as time itself; and the husbands and sons in
these households enjoy immunity at least from invisible attacks.

Not that it must be for a moment supposed that our Women are destitute
of affection.  But unfortunately the passion of the moment
predominates, in the Frail Sex, over every other consideration.  This
is, of course, a necessity arising from their unfortunate conformation.
For as they have no pretensions to an angle, being inferior in this
respect to the very lowest of the Isosceles, they are consequently
wholly devoid of brain-power, and have neither reflection, judgment nor
forethought, and hardly any memory.  Hence, in their fits of fury, they
remember no claims and recognize no distinctions.  I have actually
known a case where a Woman has exterminated her whole household, and
half an hour afterwards, when her rage was over and the fragments swept
away, has asked what has become of her husband and her children.

Obviously then a Woman is not to be irritated as long as she is in a
position where she can turn round.  When you have them in their
apartments--which are constructed with a view to denying them that
power--you can say and do what you like; for they are then wholly
impotent for mischief, and will not remember a few minutes hence the
incident for which they may be at this moment threatening you with
death, nor the promises which you may have found it necessary to make
in order to pacify their fury.

On the whole we get on pretty smoothly in our domestic relations,
except in the lower strata of the Military Classes.  There the want of
tact and discretion on the part of the husbands produces at times
indescribable disasters.  Relying too much on the offensive weapons of
their acute angles instead of the defensive organs of good sense and
seasonable simulation, these reckless creatures too often neglect the
prescribed construction of the women's apartments, or irritate their
wives by ill-advised expressions out of doors, which they refuse
immediately to retract.  Moreover a blunt and stolid regard for literal
truth indisposes them to make those lavish promises by which the more
judicious Circle can in a moment pacify his consort.  The result is
massacre; not, however, without its advantages, as it eliminates the
more brutal and troublesome of the Isosceles; and by many of our
Circles the destructiveness of the Thinner Sex is regarded as one among
many providential arrangements for suppressing redundant population,
and nipping Revolution in the bud.

Yet even in our best regulated and most approximately Circular families
I cannot say that the ideal of family life is so high as with you in
Spaceland.  There is peace, in so far as the absence of slaughter may
be called by that name, but there is necessarily little harmony of
tastes or pursuits; and the cautious wisdom of the Circles has ensured
safety at the cost of domestic comfort.  In every Circular or Polygonal
household it has been a habit from time immemorial--and now has become
a kind of instinct among the women of our higher classes--that the
mothers and daughters should constantly keep their eyes and mouths
towards their husband and his male friends; and for a lady in a family
of distinction to turn her back upon her husband would be regarded as a
kind of portent, involving loss of STATUS.  But, as I shall soon shew,
this custom, though it has the advantage of safety, is not without its
disadvantages.